JUDY WOODRUFF: The tensions
between Saudi
Arabia and Iran continued to
echo throughout
the Persian Gulf today, as
Kuwait became the
latest Sunni nation to pull its
ambassador
from Tehran, though it didn't
fully cut off
diplomatic ties.
But how is this crisis seen from
Iran?
We go to William Brangham for
that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For more on
the story, I'm
now joined on the phone by
Thomas Erdbrink,
who is the New York Times bureau
chief in
Tehran.
So, Thomas, Saudi Arabia
executes this Shiite
cleric, Nimr al-Nimr. Protests
in Iran against
the Saudis get out of hand, and
the Saudi
Embassy in Iran is destroyed.
You reported
this morning that the government
likely instigated
those initial protests, but did
they want
it to get as far out of hand as
it did?
THOMAS ERDBRINK, The New York
Times: Just
today, one of the heads of the
Iranian Revolutionary
Guard Corps told to the Fars
News Agency that
what happened at the embassy was
completely
unjustifiable, it should have
never have happened,
and he was sure that his troops
were not involved.
And we have been hearing similar
comments
from other people in the Iranian
establishment,
which is clearly a sign that
either they feel
the protests have gone too far
or, of course,
they have been shocked by the
level of blowback
from Saudi Arabia, and are now
trying to do
some damage control.
The focus completely shifted
toward them because
of their own actions. And this
is what actually
the Iranian officials are
telling me off the
record: Look, we don't like to
admit it, but
we shoved ourselves to the front
by doing
this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You report
that this crisis
comes at a time when Iran was
really hoping
to emerge as a growing power in
the Middle
East. They just signed a nuclear
deal. Sanctions
were soon to be eased. President
Rouhani was
hoping to be celebrating, not be
dealing with
this.
So, what does this mean for him
and for other
reformers in Iran?
THOMAS ERDBRINK: Well, of
course, Mr. Rouhani
came to power with the promise
of mending
relations with other countries.
The historic nuclear deal was a
clear example
of his administration going out,
negotiating
for two -- for two full years,
and then getting
Iran a deal that its supreme
leader, Ayatollah
Khamenei, could sign off on. So,
that, by
itself, was a major boost for
President Rouhani.
But, of course, now, in a time
that he was
hoping to see the result of
those negotiations,
and sanctions are about to be
lifted in the
coming days or weeks, he is
faced with the
remains of the Saudi Arabian
Embassy.
And several countries, Bahrain,
the United
Arab Emirates and two other
nations have either
completely disconnected their
diplomatic relations
with Iran or have at least
seriously downgraded
them.
So, for President Rouhani, this
is a setback.
At the same time, he is trying
literally to
come out with a more positive
spin on this.
He's been condemning, like many
other officials,
what happened at the embassy.
And, of course,
the Iranians are hoping that, in
the long
run, it will be, in the end,
Saudi Arabia
that will come out as the bad
guy, if you
will, out of this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's look a
little bit
more broadly in the region. Does
this jeopardize
the larger diplomatic
initiatives that Iran
was involved in, the talks about
ending the
Syrian civil war and the
fighting in Yemen?
What does this crisis do to
those efforts?
THOMAS ERDBRINK: Well, it's
absolutely a major
obstacle.
And let's face it. Iran is a
player in those
two theaters that you mentioned.
It allegedly
supports the Houthi rebels in
Yemen. And,
of course, it supports President
Bashar al-Assad
in Syria.
Iran has just, through
negotiations, gotten
so far that it was invited in
these major
talks that we're seeing every
couple months
on Saudi Arabia. The next one is
about the
take place on January 25. But
now the whole
debate has shifted towards the
relationship
between Iran and Saudi Arabia,
instead of
solving the crisis inside Syria.
So, if that meeting will still
happen on the
25th, will the -- will Saudi
Arabia allow
it? Will Iran go along as it is
now? Because
we don't know how this will spin
out of control.
So all and all, this is a major
obstacle to
peace in Syria and Yemen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Again, does
this indicate
that the Saudis intentionally
killed Nimr
now to incite this very reaction
and set back
the talks because they didn't
like the way
they were heading?
THOMAS ERDBRINK: Well,
absolutely.
That's what the Iranians will
also tell you.
They feel as if a trap was laid
out for them,
and they sort of stepped in it
with their
eyes closed.
The view of the Iranians is that
Saudi Arabia
has always been their regional
competitor.
So, whenever there is a conflict
involving
a Shia minority, or, for
instance, the execution
of this Shia ayatollah in Saudi
Arabia, the
Iranians feel as if the Saudis
are actually
trying to hurt them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thomas
Erdbrink of The New
York Times, thank you very much.
THOMAS ERDBRINK: Thank you.